{{meta {load_files: ["code/intro.js"]}}}

# Introduction

{{quote {author: "Ellen Ullman", title: "Close to the Machine: Technophilia and its Discontents", chapter: true}

We think we are creating the system for our own purposes. We believe
we are making it in our own image... But the computer is not really
like us. It is a projection of a very slim part of ourselves: that
portion devoted to logic, order, rule, and clarity.

quote}}

{{figure {url: "img/chapter_picture_00.jpg", alt: "Picture of a screwdriver and a circuit board", chapter: "framed"}}}

This is a book about instructing ((computer))s. Computers are about as
common as screwdrivers today, but they are quite a bit more complex,
and making them do what you want them to do isn't always easy.

If the task you have for your computer is a common, well-understood
one, such as showing you your email or acting like a calculator, you
can open the appropriate ((application)) and get to work. But for
unique or open-ended tasks, there probably is no application.

That is where ((programming)) may come in. _Programming_ is the act of
constructing a _program_—a set of precise instructions telling a
computer what to do. Because computers are dumb, pedantic beasts,
programming is fundamentally tedious and frustrating.

{{index [programming, "joy of"], speed}}

Fortunately, if you can get over that fact, and maybe even enjoy the rigor
of thinking in terms that dumb machines can deal with, programming can
be rewarding. It allows you to do things in seconds that would take
_forever_ by hand. It is a way to make your computer tool
do things that it couldn't do before. And it provides a wonderful
exercise in abstract thinking.

Most programming is done with ((programming language))s. A _programming
language_ is an artificially constructed language used to instruct
computers. It is interesting that the most effective way we've found
to communicate with a computer borrows so heavily from the way we
communicate with each other. Like human languages, computer languages
allow words and phrases to be combined in new ways, making it possible to
express ever new concepts.

{{index [JavaScript, "availability of"], "casual computing"}}

At one point language-based interfaces, such as the BASIC and DOS
prompts of the 1980s and 1990s, were the main method of interacting with
computers. They have largely been replaced with visual interfaces,
which are easier to learn but offer less freedom. Computer languages
are still there, if you know where to look. One such language,
JavaScript, is built into every modern web ((browser)) and is thus
available on almost every device.

{{indexsee "web browser", browser}}

This book will try to make you familiar enough with this language to
do useful and amusing things with it.

## On programming

{{index [programming, "difficulty of"]}}

Besides explaining JavaScript, I will introduce the basic
principles of programming. Programming, it turns out, is hard. The
fundamental rules are simple and clear, but programs built on top of
these rules tend to become complex enough to introduce their own rules
and complexity. You're building your own maze, in a way, and you might
just get lost in it.

{{index learning}}

There will be times when reading this book feels terribly frustrating.
If you are new to programming, there will be a lot of new material to
digest. Much of this material will then be _combined_ in ways that
require you to make additional connections.

It is up to you to make the necessary effort. When you are struggling
to follow the book, do not jump to any conclusions about your own
capabilities. You are fine—you just need to keep at it. Take a break,
reread some material, and make sure you read and understand the
example programs and ((exercises)). Learning is hard work, but
everything you learn is yours and will make subsequent learning
easier.

{{quote {author: "Ursula K. Le Guin", title: "The Left Hand of Darkness"}

{{index "Le Guin, Ursula K."}}

When action grows unprofitable, gather information; when information
grows unprofitable, sleep.

quote}}

{{index [program, "nature of"], data}}

A program is many things. It is a piece of text typed by a programmer,
it is the directing force that makes the computer do what it does, it
is data in the computer's memory, yet it controls the actions
performed on this same memory. Analogies that try to compare programs
to objects we are familiar with tend to fall short. A superficially
fitting one is that of a machine—lots of separate parts tend to be
involved, and to make the whole thing tick, we have to consider the
ways in which these parts interconnect and contribute to the operation
of the whole.

A ((computer)) is a physical machine that acts as a host for these immaterial
machines. Computers themselves can do only stupidly straightforward
things. The reason they are so useful is that they do these things at
an incredibly high ((speed)). A program can ingeniously combine an
enormous number of these simple actions to do very
complicated things.

{{index [programming, "joy of"]}}

A program is a building of thought. It is costless to build, it is
weightless, and it grows easily under our typing hands.

But without care, a program's size and ((complexity)) will grow out of
control, confusing even the person who created it. Keeping programs
under control is the main problem of programming. When a program
works, it is beautiful. The art of programming is the skill of
controlling complexity. The great program is subdued—made simple in
its complexity.

{{index "programming style", "best practices"}}

Some programmers believe that this complexity is best managed by using
only a small set of well-understood techniques in their programs. They
have composed strict rules ("best practices") prescribing the form
programs should have and carefully stay within their safe little
zone.

{{index experiment}}

This is not only boring, it is ineffective. New problems often
require new solutions. The field of programming is young and still
developing rapidly, and it is varied enough to have room for wildly
different approaches. There are many terrible mistakes to make in
program design, and you should go ahead and make them so that you
understand them. A sense of what a good program looks like is
developed in practice, not learned from a list of rules.

## Why language matters

{{index "programming language", "machine code", "binary data"}}

In the beginning, at the birth of computing, there were no programming
languages. Programs looked something like this:

```{lang: null}
00110001 00000000 00000000
00110001 00000001 00000001
00110011 00000001 00000010
01010001 00001011 00000010
00100010 00000010 00001000
01000011 00000001 00000000
01000001 00000001 00000001
00010000 00000010 00000000
01100010 00000000 00000000
```

{{index [programming, "history of"], "punch card", complexity}}

That is a program to add the numbers from 1 to 10 together and print
out the result: `1 + 2 + ... + 10 = 55`. It could run on a simple,
hypothetical machine. To program early computers, it was necessary to
set large arrays of switches in the right position or punch holes in
strips of cardboard and feed them to the computer. You can probably
imagine how tedious and error-prone this procedure was. Even writing
simple programs required much cleverness and discipline. Complex ones
were nearly inconceivable.

{{index bit, "wizard (mighty)"}}

Of course, manually entering these arcane patterns of bits (the ones
and zeros) did give the programmer a profound sense of being a mighty
wizard. And that has to be worth something in terms of job
satisfaction.

{{index memory, instruction}}

Each line of the previous program contains a single instruction. It
could be written in English like this:

 1. Store the number 0 in memory location 0.
 2. Store the number 1 in memory location 1.
 3. Store the value of memory location 1 in memory location 2.
 4. Subtract the number 11 from the value in memory location 2.
 5. If the value in memory location 2 is the number 0,
    continue with instruction 9.
 6. Add the value of memory location 1 to memory location 0.
 7. Add the number 1 to the value of memory location 1.
 8. Continue with instruction 3.
 9. Output the value of memory location 0.

{{index readability, naming, variable}}

Although that is already more readable than the soup of bits, it is
still rather obscure. Using names instead of numbers for the
instructions and memory locations helps.

```{lang: "text/plain"}
 Set “total” to 0.
 Set “count” to 1.
[loop]
 Set “compare” to “count”.
 Subtract 11 from “compare”.
 If “compare” is zero, continue at [end].
 Add “count” to “total”.
 Add 1 to “count”.
 Continue at [loop].
[end]
 Output “total”.
```

{{index loop, jump, "summing example"}}

Can you see how the program works at this point? The first two lines
give two memory locations their starting values: `total` will be used
to build up the result of the computation, and `count` will keep track
of the number that we are currently looking at. The lines using
`compare` are probably the weirdest ones. The program wants to see
whether `count` is equal to 11 to decide whether it can stop
running. Because our hypothetical machine is rather primitive, it can
only test whether a number is zero and make a decision based
on that. So it uses the memory location labeled `compare` to compute
the value of `count - 11` and makes a decision based on that value.
The next two lines add the value of `count` to the result and
increment `count` by 1 every time the program has decided that `count`
is not 11 yet.

Here is the same program in JavaScript:

```
let total = 0, count = 1;
while (count <= 10) {
  total += count;
  count += 1;
}
console.log(total);
// → 55
```

{{index "while loop", loop, braces}}

This version gives us a few more improvements. Most important, there
is no need to specify the way we want the program to jump back and
forth anymore. The `while` construct takes care of that. It continues
executing the block (wrapped in braces) below it as long as the
condition it was given holds. That condition is `count <= 10`, which
means “_count_ is less than or equal to 10”. We no longer have to
create a temporary value and compare that to zero, which was just an
uninteresting detail. Part of the power of programming languages is
that they can take care of uninteresting details for us.

{{index "console.log"}}

At the end of the program, after the `while` construct has finished,
the `console.log` operation is used to write out the result.

{{index "sum function", "range function", abstraction, function}}

Finally, here is what the program could look like if we happened to
have the convenient operations `range` and `sum` available, which
respectively create a ((collection)) of numbers within a range and
compute the sum of a collection of numbers:

```{startCode: true}
console.log(sum(range(1, 10)));
// → 55
```

{{index readability}}

The moral of this story is that the same program can be expressed in
both long and short, unreadable and readable ways. The first version of the
program was extremely obscure, whereas this last one is almost
English: `log` the `sum` of the `range` of numbers from 1 to 10. (We
will see in [later chapters](data) how to define operations like `sum`
and `range`.)

{{index ["programming language", "power of"], composability}}

A good programming language helps the programmer by allowing them to
talk about the actions that the computer has to perform on a higher
level. It helps omit details, provides convenient building blocks
(such as `while` and `console.log`), allows you to define your own
building blocks (such as `sum` and `range`), and makes those blocks
easy to compose.

## What is JavaScript?

{{index history, Netscape, browser, "web application", JavaScript, [JavaScript, "history of"], "World Wide Web"}}

{{indexsee WWW, "World Wide Web"}}

{{indexsee Web, "World Wide Web"}}

JavaScript was introduced in 1995 as a way to add programs to web
pages in the Netscape Navigator browser. The language has since been
adopted by all other major graphical web browsers. It has made modern
web applications possible—applications with which you can interact
directly without doing a page reload for every action. JavaScript is also
used in more traditional websites to provide various forms of
interactivity and cleverness.

{{index Java, naming}}

It is important to note that JavaScript has almost nothing to do with
the programming language named Java. The similar name was inspired by
marketing considerations rather than good judgment. When JavaScript
was being introduced, the Java language was being heavily marketed and
was gaining popularity. Someone thought it was a good idea to try to
ride along on this success. Now we are stuck with the name.

{{index ECMAScript, compatibility}}

After its adoption outside of Netscape, a ((standard)) document was
written to describe the way the JavaScript language should work so
that the various pieces of software that claimed to support JavaScript
were actually talking about the same language. This is called the
ECMAScript standard, after the Ecma International organization that
did the standardization. In practice, the terms ECMAScript and
JavaScript can be used interchangeably—they are two names for the same
language.

{{index [JavaScript, "weaknesses of"], debugging}}

There are those who will say _terrible_ things about JavaScript. Many
of these things are true. When I was required to write something in
JavaScript for the first time, I quickly came to despise it. It would
accept almost anything I typed but interpret it in a way that was
completely different from what I meant. This had a lot to do with the
fact that I did not have a clue what I was doing, of course, but there
is a real issue here: JavaScript is ridiculously liberal in what it
allows. The idea behind this design was that it would make programming
in JavaScript easier for beginners. In actuality, it mostly makes
finding problems in your programs harder because the system will not
point them out to you.

{{index [JavaScript, "flexibility of"], flexibility}}

This flexibility also has its advantages, though. It leaves space for
a lot of techniques that are impossible in more rigid languages, and
as you will see (for example in [Chapter ?](modules)), it can be used
to overcome some of JavaScript's shortcomings. After ((learning)) the
language properly and working with it for a while, I have learned to
actually _like_ JavaScript.

{{index future, [JavaScript, "versions of"], ECMAScript, "ECMAScript 6"}}

There have been several versions of JavaScript. ECMAScript version 3
was the widely supported version in the time of JavaScript's ascent to
dominance, roughly between 2000 and 2010. During this time, work was
underway on an ambitious version 4, which planned a number of radical
improvements and extensions to the language. Changing a living, widely
used language in such a radical way turned out to be politically
difficult, and work on the version 4 was abandoned in 2008, leading to
a much less ambitious version 5, which made only some uncontroversial
improvements, coming out in 2009. Then in 2015 version 6 came out, a
major update that included some of the ideas planned for version 4.
Since then we've had new, small updates every year.

The fact that the language is evolving means that browsers have to
constantly keep up, and if you're using an older browser, it may not
support every feature. The language designers are careful to not make
any changes that could break existing programs, so new browsers can
still run old programs. In this book, I'm using the 2017 version of
JavaScript.

{{index [JavaScript, "uses of"]}}

Web browsers are not the only platforms on which JavaScript is used.
Some databases, such as MongoDB and CouchDB, use JavaScript as their
scripting and query language. Several platforms for desktop and server
programming, most notably the ((Node.js)) project (the subject of
[Chapter ?](node)), provide an environment for programming JavaScript
outside of the browser.

## Code, and what to do with it

{{index "reading code", "writing code"}}

_Code_ is the text that makes up programs. Most chapters in this book
contain quite a lot of code. I believe reading code and writing ((code))
are indispensable parts of ((learning)) to program. Try to not just
glance over the examples—read them attentively and understand them.
This may be slow and confusing at first, but I promise that you'll
quickly get the hang of it. The same goes for the ((exercises)). Don't
assume you understand them until you've actually written a working
solution.

{{index interpretation}}

I recommend you try your solutions to exercises in an actual
JavaScript interpreter. That way, you'll get immediate feedback on
whether what you are doing is working, and, I hope, you'll be tempted
to ((experiment)) and go beyond the exercises.

{{if interactive

When reading this book in your browser, you can edit (and run) all
example programs by clicking them.

if}}

{{if book

{{index download, sandbox, "running code"}}

The easiest way to run the example code in the book, and to experiment
with it, is to look it up in the online version of the book at
[_https://eloquentjavascript.net_](https://eloquentjavascript.net/). There,
you can click any code example to edit and run it and to see the
output it produces. To work on the exercises, go to
[_https://eloquentjavascript.net/code_](https://eloquentjavascript.net/code),
which provides starting code for each coding exercise and allows you
to look at the solutions.

if}}

{{index "developer tools", "JavaScript console"}}

If you want to run the programs defined in this book outside of the
book's website, some care will be required. Many examples stand on their
own and should work in any JavaScript environment. But code in later
chapters is often written for a specific environment (the browser or
Node.js) and can run only there. In addition, many chapters define
bigger programs, and the pieces of code that appear in them depend on
each other or on external files. The
[sandbox](https://eloquentjavascript.net/code) on the website provides
links to Zip files containing all the scripts and data files
necessary to run the code for a given chapter.

## Overview of this book

This book contains roughly three parts. The first 12 chapters discuss
the JavaScript language. The next seven chapters are about web
((browsers)) and the way JavaScript is used to program them. Finally,
two chapters are devoted to ((Node.js)), another environment to
program JavaScript in.

Throughout the book, there are five _project chapters_, which describe
larger example programs to give you a taste of actual programming. In
order of appearance, we will work through building a [delivery
robot](robot), a [programming language](language), a [platform
game](game), a [pixel paint program](paint), and a [dynamic
website](skillsharing).

The language part of the book starts with four chapters that introduce
the basic structure of the JavaScript language. They introduce
[control structures](program_structure) (such as the `while` word you
saw in this introduction), [functions](functions) (writing your own
building blocks), and [data structures](data). After these, you will
be able to write basic programs. Next, Chapters [?](higher_order) and
[?](object) introduce techniques to use functions and objects to write
more _abstract_ code and keep complexity under control.

After a [first project chapter](robot), the language part of the book
continues with chapters on [error handling and bug fixing](error),
[regular expressions](regexp) (an important tool for working with
text), [modularity](modules) (another defense against complexity), and
[asynchronous programming](async) (dealing with events that take
time). The [second project chapter](language) concludes the first part
of the book.

The second part, Chapters [?](browser) to [?](paint), describes the
tools that browser JavaScript has access to. You'll learn to display
things on the screen (Chapters [?](dom) and [?](canvas)), respond to
user input ([Chapter ?](event)), and communicate over the network
([Chapter ?](http)). There are again two project chapters in this
part.

After that, [Chapter ?](node) describes Node.js, and [Chapter
?](skillsharing) builds a small website using that tool.

{{if commercial

Finally, [Chapter ?](fast) describes some of the considerations that
come up when optimizing JavaScript programs for speed.

if}}

## Typographic conventions

{{index "factorial function"}}

In this book, text written in a `monospaced` font will represent
elements of programs—sometimes they are self-sufficient fragments, and
sometimes they just refer to part of a nearby program. Programs (of
which you have already seen a few) are written as follows:

```
function factorial(n) {
  if (n == 0) {
    return 1;
  } else {
    return factorial(n - 1) * n;
  }
}
```

{{index "console.log"}}

Sometimes, to show the output that a program produces, the
expected output is written after it, with two slashes and an arrow in
front.

```
console.log(factorial(8));
// → 40320
```

Good luck!
