# JavaScript and the Browser

{{quote {author: "Tim Berners-Lee", title: "The World Wide Web: A very short personal history", chapter: true}

The dream behind the Web is of a common information space in which we
communicate by sharing information. Its universality is essential: the
fact that a hypertext link can point to anything, be it personal,
local or global, be it draft or highly polished.

quote}}

{{index "Berners-Lee, Tim", "World Wide Web", HTTP, [JavaScript, "history of"], "World Wide Web"}}

{{figure {url: "img/chapter_picture_13.jpg", alt: "Picture of a telephone switchboard", chapter: "framed"}}}

The next chapters of this book will talk about web browsers. Without
web ((browser))s, there would be no JavaScript. Or even if there were,
no one would ever have paid any attention to it.

{{index decentralization, compatibility}}

Web technology has, from the start, been decentralized, not just
technically but also in the way it evolved. Various browser vendors
have added new functionality in ad hoc and sometimes poorly thought-out
ways, which then, sometimes, ended up being adopted by others—and
finally set down as in ((standards)).

This is both a blessing and a curse. On the one hand, it is empowering
to not have a central party control a system but have it be improved
by various parties working in loose ((collaboration)) (or occasionally
open hostility). On the other hand, the haphazard way in which the Web
was developed means that the resulting system is not exactly a shining
example of internal ((consistency)). Some parts of it are downright
confusing and poorly conceived.

## Networks and the Internet

Computer ((network))s have been around since the 1950s. If you put
cables between two or more computers and allow them to send data back
and forth through these cables, you can do all kinds of wonderful
things.

And if connecting two machines in the same building allows us to do
wonderful things, connecting machines all over the planet should be
even better. The technology to start implementing this vision was
developed in the 1980s, and the resulting network is called the
_((Internet))_. It has lived up to its promise.

A computer can use this network to shoot bits at another computer. For
any effective ((communication)) to arise out of this bit-shooting, the
computers on both ends must know what the bits are supposed to
represent. The meaning of any given sequence of bits depends entirely
on the kind of thing that it is trying to express and on the
((encoding)) mechanism used.

A _network ((protocol))_ describes a style of communication over a
((network)). There are protocols for sending email, for fetching email,
for sharing files, and even for controlling computers that happen to be
infected by malicious software.

{{indexsee "Hypertext Transfer Protocol", HTTP}}

For example, the _Hypertext Transfer Protocol_ (((HTTP))) is
a protocol for retrieving named ((resource))s (chunks of information,
such as web pages or pictures). It specifies that the side making the
request should start with a line like this, naming the resource and
the version of the protocol that it is trying to use:

```{lang: "text/plain"}
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
```

There are a lot more rules about the way the requester can include more
information in the ((request)) and the way the other side, which
returns the resource, packages up its content. We'll look at HTTP in a
little more detail in [Chapter ?](http).

{{index layering, stream, ordering}}

Most protocols are built on top of other protocols. HTTP treats the
network as a streamlike device into which you can put bits and have
them arrive at the correct destination in the correct order. As we saw
in [Chapter ?](async), ensuring those things is already a rather
difficult problem.

{{index TCP}}

{{indexsee "Transmission Control Protocol", TCP}}

The _Transmission Control Protocol_ (TCP) is a ((protocol)) that
addresses this problem. All Internet-connected devices "speak" it, and
most communication on the ((Internet)) is built on top of it.

{{index "listening (TCP)"}}

A TCP ((connection)) works as follows: one computer must be waiting,
or _listening_, for other computers to start talking to it. To be able
to listen for different kinds of communication at the same time on a
single machine, each listener has a number (called a _((port))_)
associated with it. Most ((protocol))s specify which port should be
used by default. For example, when we want to send an email using the
((SMTP)) protocol, the machine through which we send it is expected to
be listening on port 25.

Another computer can then establish a ((connection)) by connecting to
the target machine using the correct port number. If the target
machine can be reached and is listening on that port, the connection
is successfully created. The listening computer is called the
_((server))_, and the connecting computer is called the _((client))_.

Such a connection acts as a two-way ((pipe)) through which bits can
flow—the machines on both ends can put data into it. Once the bits are
successfully transmitted, they can be read out again by the machine on
the other side. This is a convenient model. You could say that ((TCP))
provides an ((abstraction)) of the network.

{{id web}}

## The Web

The _((World Wide Web))_ (not to be confused with the ((Internet)) as
a whole) is a set of ((protocol))s and formats that allow us to visit
web pages in a browser. The "Web" part in the name refers to the fact
that such pages can easily link to each other, thus connecting into a
huge ((mesh)) that users can move through.

To become part of the Web, all you need to do is connect a machine to
the ((Internet)) and have it listen on port 80 with the ((HTTP))
protocol so that other computers can ask it for documents.

{{index URL}}

{{indexsee "Uniform Resource Locator", URL}}

Each ((document)) on the Web is named by a _Uniform Resource Locator_
(URL), which looks something like this:

```{lang: null}
  http://eloquentjavascript.net/13_browser.html
 |      |                      |               |
 protocol       server               path
```

{{index HTTPS}}

The first part tells us that this URL uses the HTTP ((protocol)) (as
opposed to, for example, encrypted HTTP, which would be _https://_).
Then comes the part that identifies which ((server)) we are requesting
the document from. Last is a path string that identifies the specific
document (or _((resource))_) we are interested in.

Machines connected to the Internet get an _((IP address))_, which is a
number that can be used to send messages to that machine, and looks
something like `149.210.142.219` or `2001:4860:4860::8888`. But lists
of more or less random numbers are hard to remember and awkward to
type, so you can instead register a _((domain)) name_ for a specific
address or set of addresses. I registered _eloquentjavascript.net_ to
point at the IP address of a machine I control and can thus use that
domain name to serve web pages.

{{index browser}}

If you type this URL into your browser's ((address bar)), the browser
will try to retrieve and display the ((document)) at that URL. First,
your browser has to find out what address _eloquentjavascript.net_
refers to. Then, using the ((HTTP)) protocol, it will make a
connection to the server at that address and ask for the resource
_/13_browser.html_. If all goes well, the server sends back a
document, which your browser then displays on your screen.

## HTML

{{index HTML}}

{{indexsee "Hypertext Markup Language", HTML}}

HTML, which stands for _Hypertext Markup Language_, is the document
format used for web pages. An HTML document contains ((text)), as well
as _((tag))s_ that give structure to the text, describing things such
as links, paragraphs, and headings.

A short HTML document might look like this:

```{lang: "text/html"}
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <title>My home page</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>My home page</h1>
    <p>Hello, I am Marijn and this is my home page.</p>
    <p>I also wrote a book! Read it
      <a href="http://eloquentjavascript.net">here</a>.</p>
  </body>
</html>
```

{{if book

This is what such a document would look like in the browser:

{{figure {url: "img/home-page.png", alt: "My home page",width: "6.3cm"}}}

if}}

The tags, wrapped in ((angle brackets)) (`<` and `>`, the symbols for
_less than_ and _greater than_), provide information about the
((structure)) of the document. The other ((text)) is just plain text.

{{index doctype, version}}

The document starts with `<!doctype html>`, which tells the browser to
interpret the page as _modern_ HTML, as opposed to various dialects
that were in use in the past.

{{index "head (HTML tag)", "body (HTML tag)", "title (HTML tag)", "h1 (HTML tag)", "p (HTML tag)"}}

HTML documents have a head and a body. The head contains information
_about_ the document, and the body contains the document itself. In
this case, the head declares that the title of this document is "My
home page" and that it uses the UTF-8 encoding, which is a way to
encode Unicode text as binary data. The document's body contains a
heading (`<h1>`, meaning "heading 1"—`<h2>` to `<h6>` produce
subheadings) and two ((paragraph))s (`<p>`).

{{index "href attribute", "a (HTML tag)"}}

Tags come in several forms. An ((element)), such as the body, a
paragraph, or a link, is started by an _((opening tag))_ like `<p>`
and ended by a _((closing tag))_ like `</p>`. Some opening tags, such
as the one for the ((link)) (`<a>`), contain extra information in the
form of `name="value"` pairs. These are called _((attribute))s_. In
this case, the destination of the link is indicated with
`href="http://eloquentjavascript.net"`, where `href` stands for
"hypertext reference".

{{index "src attribute", "self-closing tag", "img (HTML tag)"}}

Some kinds of ((tag))s do not enclose anything and thus do not need to
be closed. The metadata tag `<meta charset="utf-8">` is an example of
this.

{{index [escaping, "in HTML"]}}

To be able to include ((angle brackets)) in the text of a document,
even though they have a special meaning in HTML, yet another form of
special notation has to be introduced. A plain opening angle bracket
is written as `&lt;` ("less than"), and a closing bracket is written
as `&gt;` ("greater than"). In HTML, an ampersand (`&`) character
followed by a name or character code and a semicolon (`;`) is called an _((entity))_
and will be replaced by the character it encodes.

{{index "backslash character", "ampersand character", "double-quote character"}}

This is analogous to the way backslashes are used in JavaScript
strings. Since this mechanism gives ampersand characters a special
meaning, too, they need to be escaped as `&amp;`. Inside attribute
values, which are wrapped in double quotes, `&quot;` can be used to
insert an actual quote character.

{{index "error tolerance", parsing}}

HTML is parsed in a remarkably error-tolerant way. When tags that
should be there are missing, the browser reconstructs them. The way in
which this is done has been standardized, and you can rely on all
modern browsers to do it in the same way.

The following document will be treated just like the one shown previously:

```{lang: "text/html"}
<!doctype html>

<meta charset=utf-8>
<title>My home page</title>

<h1>My home page</h1>
<p>Hello, I am Marijn and this is my home page.
<p>I also wrote a book! Read it
  <a href=http://eloquentjavascript.net>here</a>.
```

{{index "title (HTML tag)", "head (HTML tag)", "body (HTML tag)", "html (HTML tag)"}}

The `<html>`, `<head>`, and `<body>` tags are gone completely. The
browser knows that `<meta>` and `<title>` belong in the head and that
`<h1>` means the body has started. Furthermore, I am no longer
explicitly closing the paragraphs since opening a new paragraph or
ending the document will close them implicitly. The quotes around the
attribute values are also gone.

This book will usually omit the `<html>`, `<head>`, and `<body>` tags
from examples to keep them short and free of clutter. But I _will_
close tags and include quotes around attributes.

{{index browser}}

I will also usually omit the ((doctype)) and `charset` declaration.
This is not to be taken as an encouragement to drop these from HTML
documents. Browsers will often do ridiculous things when you forget
them. You should consider the doctype and the `charset` metadata
to be implicitly present in examples, even when they are not actually shown
in the text.

{{id script_tag}}

## HTML and JavaScript

{{index [JavaScript, "in HTML"], "script (HTML tag)"}}

In the context of this book, the most important ((HTML)) tag is
`<script>`. This tag allows us to include a piece of JavaScript in a
document.

```{lang: "text/html"}
<h1>Testing alert</h1>
<script>alert("hello!");</script>
```

{{index "alert function", timeline}}

Such a script will run as soon as its `<script>` tag is encountered
while the browser reads the HTML. This page will pop up a dialog when
opened—the `alert` function resembles `prompt`, in that it pops up a
little window, but only shows a message without asking for input.

{{index "src attribute"}}

Including large programs directly in HTML documents is often
impractical. The `<script>` tag can be given an `src` attribute  to fetch a script file (a text file containing a JavaScript
program) from a URL.

```{lang: "text/html"}
<h1>Testing alert</h1>
<script src="code/hello.js"></script>
```

The _code/hello.js_ file included here contains the same
program—`alert("hello!")`. When an HTML page references other URLs as
part of itself—for example, an image file or a script—web browsers
will retrieve them immediately and include them in the page.

{{index "script (HTML tag)", "closing tag"}}

A script tag must always be closed with `</script>`, even if it refers
to a script file and doesn't contain any code. If you forget this, the
rest of the page will be interpreted as part of the script.

{{index "relative path", dependency}}

You can load ((ES modules)) (see [Chapter ?](modules#es)) in the
browser by giving your script tag a `type="module"` attribute. Such
modules can depend on other modules by using ((URL))s relative to
themselves as module names in `import` declarations.

{{index "button (HTML tag)", "onclick attribute"}}

Some attributes can also contain a JavaScript program. The `<button>`
tag shown next (which shows up as a button) has an `onclick`
attribute. The attribute's value will be run whenever the button is
clicked.

```{lang: "text/html"}
<button onclick="alert('Boom!');">DO NOT PRESS</button>
```

{{index "single-quote character", [escaping, "in HTML"]}}

Note that I had to use single quotes for the string in the `onclick`
attribute because double quotes are already used to quote the whole
attribute. I could also have used `&quot;`.

## In the sandbox

{{index "malicious script", "World Wide Web", browser, website, security}}

Running programs downloaded from the ((Internet)) is potentially
dangerous. You do not know much about the people behind most sites you
visit, and they do not necessarily mean well. Running programs by
people who do not mean well is how you get your computer infected by
((virus))es, your data stolen, and your accounts hacked.

Yet the attraction of the Web is that you can browse it without
necessarily ((trust))ing all the pages you visit. This is why browsers
severely limit the things a JavaScript program may do: it can't look
at the files on your computer or modify anything not related to the
web page it was embedded in.

{{index isolation}}

Isolating a programming environment in this way is called
_((sandbox))ing_, the idea being that the program is harmlessly
playing in a sandbox. But you should imagine this particular kind of
sandbox as having a cage of thick steel bars over it so that the
programs playing in it can't actually get out.

The hard part of sandboxing is allowing the programs enough room to be
useful yet at the same time restricting them from doing anything
dangerous. Lots of useful functionality, such as communicating with
other servers or reading the content of the copy-paste ((clipboard)),
can also be used to do problematic, ((privacy))-invading things.

{{index leak, exploit, security}}

Every now and then, someone comes up with a new way to circumvent the
limitations of a ((browser)) and do something harmful, ranging from
leaking minor private information to taking over the whole machine
that the browser runs on. The browser developers respond by fixing the
hole, and all is well again—until the next problem is discovered, and
hopefully publicized, rather than secretly exploited by some
government agency or ((mafia)).

## Compatibility and the browser wars

{{index Microsoft, "World Wide Web"}}

In the early stages of the Web, a browser called ((Mosaic)) dominated
the market. After a few years, the balance shifted to
((Netscape)), which was then, in turn, largely supplanted by
Microsoft's ((Internet Explorer)). At any point where a single
((browser)) was dominant, that browser's vendor would feel entitled to
unilaterally invent new features for the Web. Since most users used
the most popular browser, ((website))s would simply start using those
features—never mind the other browsers.

This was the dark age of ((compatibility)), often called the
_((browser wars))_. Web developers were left with not one unified Web
but two or three incompatible platforms. To make things worse, the
browsers in use around 2003 were all full of ((bug))s, and of course
the bugs were different for each ((browser)). Life was hard for people
writing web pages.

{{index Apple, "Internet Explorer", Mozilla}}

Mozilla ((Firefox)), a not-for-profit offshoot of ((Netscape)),
challenged Internet Explorer's position in the late 2000s. Because
((Microsoft)) was not particularly interested in staying competitive
at the time, Firefox took a lot of market share away from it. Around
the same time, ((Google)) introduced its ((Chrome)) browser, and
Apple's ((Safari)) browser gained popularity, leading to a situation
where there were four major players, rather than one.

{{index compatibility}}

The new players had a more serious attitude toward ((standards)) and
better ((engineering)) practices, giving us less incompatibility and
fewer ((bug))s. Microsoft, seeing its market share crumble, came
around and adopted these attitudes in its Edge browser, which replaces
Internet Explorer. If you are starting to learn web development today,
consider yourself lucky. The latest versions of the major browsers
behave quite uniformly and have relatively few bugs.
